Good news! I'm now afraid of global pandemics. As a kid, I thought it would be amazing to grow up and be successful enough that someone else would cook all my meals for me. But since living for two years in Europe with very few distractions, my new dream is to have the time, energy, and resources to cook every meal for the rest of my life. Ooh, that's spicy content. I never actually found my phone, but I went on a five-hour trip "looking for it" with a cute girl and now we've been married for two and a half years, so it turned out all right. My Constitutional Law professor, preparing to talk about our next case: George, how do you feel about Roe v. Wade? That's a loaded question. How do you feel about helping me with Roe v. Wade? Most people are aware of vestigial anatomy. There are parts of your body which serve little to no purpose, without which you could live a full and healthy life. They are there because they were useful to an ancestor, someone generations ago and of a different species, but because they are no longer useful to you, they shrink and become inactive. You have a tailbone not because it benefits you, but because your distant ancestors had tails. You have an appendix because some of your ancestors benefited from it. But the appendix has become harmful. It can get inflamed, rupture, and threaten the life of the organism. Having become more a liability than a benefit, it may yet fade away entirely in evolutionary time. We can only hope.
Less well known than vestigial organs are vestigial responses. These are the sorts of involuntary, natural things your body does because they helped some ancestor survive and prosper. You hiccup when you are drunk or surprised because your brain wants the jolt of clarity and energy that comes from pushing more water through your gills, nevermind that you breathe air now. Some scientists have theorized that yawning is contagious because it helped early social primates coordinate sleeping or served some other communal purpose, though this is far from proven. While hiccuping may not be as threatening as an inflamed appendix, it sure is a nuisance. Having become more of a liability than a benefit, it may yet fade away entirely in evolutionary time. We can only hope.
Vestigial traits exist in probably every currently living organism, and are locked deep in our DNA. I believe, though, that we, as humans, have some unique vestiges of our own. Instead of organs or reactions, these are vestigial social behaviors. Early hominids benefited from having a clear idea of who was an insider, and who was an outsider. Aggression towards strangers was selected for, as was the hoarding of resources and use of deception and force to obtain more. We cannot blame our ancestors for this development; the world they lived in was much like ours physically, but their way of life would be utterly alien to us. But because our society sprang from their first flailing attempts at culture, we have vestigial cultural traits. We now have the resources to ensure that everyone can have enough, that everyone can participate in culture and innovation and expanding the miracle of collaborative civilization that is truly unique to humans. We alone, in all of creation and all of history, could create a world more free from suffering, a world where equals live and work and prosper and exult in the joy of being alive, and being together.
But our vestigial inclinations stand in the way. We make enemies where we no longer need to fight. We construct totems of those with whom we disagree, and rally, not around mutual causes, but around mutual contempt. We imagine outsiders simply, and insiders complexly, so that we can better justify misdeeds that we no longer need to commit to survive. Clearly, this behavior is no longer beneficial to our species, or even to us individually.
Having become more of a liability than a benefit, these behaviors may yet fade away entirely.
We can hope.
But in banishing these vestiges, hope is not our only weapon.
We can choose. And we must. Joe Biden is the first actor from a Michael Schur production to become president of the United States. Martin Luther King Jr., like the Savior he worshipped, was sent in part to call us out for being too comfortable. He declared capitalism to be an evil. He told us that our nation was racist, and that to fix the systemic issues for people of his race would require not just political, but economic reform amounting to billions of dollars of sacrifice. He knew that the cautious moderate is as much an enemy to progress as the avowed white supremacist. He taught us that religions that do not ask for great sacrifice and hard work from their congregations are no better than social clubs, and perhaps worse, because they are guilty not only of elitism but of hypocrisy as well. Like Jesus, the man said a lot that was comforting and uplifting, and like Jesus, if we reduce him to only those things, we are not only failing to honor his legacy, we are condemning ourselves in the process.
